The state of public opinion also imposes a constraint on the size of the state in another respect. Every firm in the large-scale business of property expropriation must naturally aim to be a monopolist in a definite territory, for one can only prosper in such a business so long as there is something that can be expropriated. However, if competition were allowed in the business of expropriating, there would obviously be nothing left to take. Hence, in order to stay in business, one must be a monopolist. De position wey public opinion dey even reduce how de size of the state suppose be in anoda respect. All of de company wey dey do business wey big wella for property expropriation been dey run say make na only dem dey do business for dat side, cos say de only way to hammer for dat kin business na if something wey dem fit expropriate dey there. Howeva, if to say competition dey allowed for inside de expropriation business, nothing go remain to carry for mandem again. So na to beome monopolist na em dem go dey run after now so dat dem go still fit dey for business.

Even if there is no internal competition, competition between governments operating in different territories still exists, and it is this competition that imposes severe limits on the size of government. On the one hand, it opens up the possibility that people may vote with their feet against a government and leave its territory if they perceive other territories as offering less exploitative living conditions. Naturally, each state must see this as a crucial problem, for it literally lives off a population, and any population loss is thus a loss of potential state-income.[^22] Again, the state of public opinion is of utmost importance for maintaining exploitative rule. Only if the state succeeds in generating the impression in the general public that that state’s own territory compares favorably, or at least tolerably well with others will it be able to secure and expand its position.

Even if say internal competition between business no dey sef, de competition wey dey between governments wey dey operate for inside different territories still dey gidigba, and na dis competition dey limit how big de government fit grow. For one side, de ting open up de possibility say make some people wan dey vote with dem feet sef against any government and to comot de area if dem feel say other territories dey offer living conditions wey dey less exploitative. Normal, all of de state must see dis kin ting as one major problem, cos say e dey suffer one population, and any of de population wey loss na loss also for state-income. [^22] Again, de condition wey public opinion dey dey very important to dey maintain de kin rule wey dey exploitative. Na only if de state succeed as dem dey generate de impression for de whole public say we fit take de state own territory sef compare favorably, or atleast tolerably well na em e go fit dey able to secure and expand em position.


Public opinion also plays a decisive role in the case of interstate aggression. While not a logical necessity, the nature of a state as an exploitative enterprise still makes it highly likely (not the least because of the just addressed problem of population movements) that it will become engaged in aggression against a “foreign” territory, or that it must defend itself against such aggression from other states.[^23] Moreover, in order to emerge successfully from such interstate wars or warlike actions, a state must be in command of sufficient (in relative terms) economic resources that alone make its actions sustainable. However, these resources can only be provided by a productive population. Thus, to secure the means necessary to win wars and avoid being confronted with slackening productive outputs while at war, public opinion again turns out to be the decisive variable controlling the size of government. Only if popular support for the state’s war exists can it be sustained and possibly won.
Public opinion sef dey play important role wen de matta concern interstate aggression. While e no be logical necessity, de nature wey state get as em be one kin exploitative enterprise go still make am very likely (not de least cos of de population movement problem wey just dey addressed) say em go become engaged in aggression for one “foreign” territory, or say em fit defend itself against dat kin aggression from de other states.[^23] Also, for to emerge successfully under dat kin interstate war or warlike actions, a state gat dey in command of economic resources wey plenty (in relative terms) and wey go make e actions dey sustainable. Howeva, dis kin resources only fit dey provided by population wey dey productive. Therefore, for to secure de necessary means to win wars and avoid confrontation wit slackening productive outputs while dem dey at war, na public opinion go be de decisive variable wey go control de government size. Na only if say popular support for state war dey na em de war go fit dey sustainable and possible to win.

Finally, the state of public opinion limits the size of government in yet a third way. While the state maintains its position vis-à-vis the exploited population through coercion and the successful management of public opinion, to maintain its own internal order, which regulates the relationships between the various branches of government and its employees, there is nothing else at its disposal but public opinion, for clearly, no one outside the state exists who could enforce its internal rules upon it. Rather, the enforcement must be accomplished exclusively by means of supportive public opinion among state employees themselves in the various branches of government.[^24] That is, the president cannot coerce the general to go to war—in fact, the greater physical strength would probably be on the general’s side; and the general in turn cannot coerce his soldiers to do the fighting and killing—in fact, they could smash him anytime. President and general can only succeed because of favorable intrastate public opinion, and only insofar as the overwhelming majority of the state employees at least passively supports their actions as legitimate. If, in the various branches of government, a large majority of them were strictly opposed to the enforcement of presidential policy, it could not be put into action successfully. The general who thinks most of his troops consider the war illegitimate or who thinks that the Congress, the IRS, the large majority of public educators and the so-called social services regard such actions as outrageous and to be openly opposed, would face an impossible task even if he himself supported the presidential command.[^25]
Finally, de state of public opinion dey limit de size of government, in yet a third way. While em be say na de state dey maintain em position for de exploited population through coercion and de successful management of public opinion, to maintain e own internal order, wey dey regulate de relationship between all of de branches of de government and dem employees, nothing else dey at dem diposal except public opinion, cos say no one outside de state dey wey fit enforce em internal rules on top am. Rather, de enforcement gat dey accomplished exclusively through supportive public opinion among state employees sef for de various branches of government.[^24] E mean say de president no fit coerce de general to go war- in fact, most of de physical strength go gat dey de generals angle, and de general sef no fit coerce em soldiers to do all de fighting and killing- in fact, dem fit kill am anytime sef. De president and general only fit succeed cos of favourable intrastate public opinion, and only as much as de plenty majority of de state employees atleast partially support dem action as legitimate. If to say, in de various branches of government, a large majority of dem dey strictly opposed to de enforcement of presidential policy, e no still fit engage successfully. De general wey think most of em troop consider de war illegitimate or wey think de Congress, de IRS, de large majority of public educators and de social services people regard those kin action as outrageous and wey go get open opposition, go face an impossible task even if e emsef support de presidential command.[^25] 

With public opinion rather than demand and cost conditions thus identified as the constraining force on the size of government, I return to my original explanation of the phenomenon of ever-increasing taxation as “simply” a change in prevailing ideas.
As public opinion instead of demand and cost condition don dey identified as de constraining force for de size of government, I go return to my original explanation of de phenomenon wey follow ever-increasing taxation as “simply” change wey dey for prevailing ideas.

If it is public opinion that ultimately limits the size of an exploitative firm, then an explanation of its growth in purely ideological terms is justified. Indeed, any other explanation, not in terms of ideological changes but of changes in “objective” conditions must be considered wrong. The size of government does not increase because of any objective causes over which ideas have no control and certainly not because there is a demand for it. It grows because the ideas that prevail in public opinion of what is just and what is wrong have changed. What once was regarded by public opinion as an outrage, to be treated and dealt with as such, has become increasingly accepted as legitimate.
If to say na public opinion wey dey ultimately limit de size of an exploitative firm, then an explanation of em growth for purely identified terms dey justified. Really, any other explanation, ones wey no dey in terms of ideological changes but ones wey dey change for “objective” conditions gat be considered wrong. De size of government no dey increase cos of any objective cause on top which ideas no get control and certainly no be cos of say demand dey for am. E dey grow cos de ideas wey wey dey prevail for public opinion of wetin dey just and wetin dey wrong don change. Wetin dey regarded once by public opinion as outrage, wey go dey treated and dealt with don become increasingly accepted as legitimate.

What has happened regarding the general public’s conception of justice?[^26]
Wetin don happen regarding de conception of justice by general public? [^26]

[^16]: To make this distinction between economics and history or sociology is not to say, of course, that economics is of no importance for these latter disciplines. In fact, economics is indispensable for all other social sciences. While the reverse is not the case, economics can be developed and advanced without historical or sociological knowledge. The only consequence of doing so is that such economics would probably not be very interesting, as it would be written without consideration of real examples or instances of application (as if one were to write on the economics of taxation even though there had never been an actual example of it in all of history), for it would formulate what could not possibly happen in the social world, or what would have to happen provided that certain conditions were in fact fulfilled. Thus, any historical or sociological explanation is logically constrained by the laws as espoused by economic theory, and any account by a historian or sociologist in violation of these laws must be treated as ultimately confused. On the relationship between economic theory and history see also Ludwig von Mises, Theory and History (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1985); Hans-Hermann Hoppe, Praxeology and Economic Science (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988).
[^16]: To make de distinction between economics and history or sociology no be say, of course, economics no dey important to these latter disciplines. In fact, economics dey indispensable for all other social sciences. While de reverse no be de case, economics fit dey developed and advanced without historical or sociological knowledge. De only consequence of doing so be say such economics probably no go dey interesting, as dem go write am without consideration of real examples or instances wey dey don apply am before (cos if say person wan write for economics of taxation even though actual example of am never dey history), cos em go formulate wetin go happen for de social world, or wetin no fit happen for social world, or wetin go gat happen as far as certain conditions dey fulfilled. Thus, any historical or sociological explanation dey logically constrained by de laws as economic theory show am, and any account wey come from an historian or sociologist in violation of de laws gat be treated as ultimately confused. As per de relationship between economic theory and history see dis one too Ludwig von Mises, Theory and History (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1985); Hans-Hermann Hoppe, Praxeology and Economic Science (Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute, 1988).

[^17]: See on this also Franz Oppenheimer, The State (New York: Vanguard Press, 1914) esp. pp. 24–27; Rothbard, Power and Market, chap. 2; Hoppe, A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism, chap. 2.
[^17]: See dis one too Franz Oppenheimer, The State (New York: Vanguard Press, 1914) esp. pp. 24–27; Rothbard, Power and Market, chap. 2; Hoppe, A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism, chap. 2.

[^18]: On the theory of the state as developed in the following see—in addition to the works cited in note 17—in particular Herbert Spencer, Social Statics (New York: Schalkenbach Foundation, 1970); Auberon Herbert, The Right and Wrong of Compulsion by the State (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 1978); Albert J. Nock, Our Enemy, the State (Tampa, Fla.: Hallberg Publishing, 1983); Murray N. Rothbard, For a New Liberty (New York: Macmillan, 1978); idem, The Ethics of Liberty (Atlantic Highlands, N.J.: Humanities Press, 1982); Hans-Hermann Hoppe, Eigentum, Anarchie und Staat (Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag, 1987); Anthony de Jasay, The State (Oxford: Blackwell, 1985).
[^18]: On de theory of de state wey dey developed in de following, see – plus de works cited for note 17- in particular Herbert Spencer, Social Statics (New York: Schalkenbach Foundation, 1970); Auberon Herbert, The Right and Wrong of Compulsion by the State (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 1978); Albert J. Nock, Our Enemy, the State (Tampa, Fla.: Hallberg Publishing, 1983); Murray N. Rothbard, For a New Liberty (New York: Macmillan, 1978); idem, The Ethics of Liberty (Atlantic Highlands, N.J.: Humanities Press, 1982); Hans-Hermann Hoppe, Eigentum, Anarchie und Staat (Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag, 1987); Anthony de Jasay, The State (Oxford: Blackwell, 1985).

[^19]:  This central idea of the public choice school has been expressed by its foremost representatives as follows:
[^19]:  De central idea wey de public choice school get been don dey expressed by em foremost representatives as follows:

